SMG comments (#819)
meyer-lab/tHMM: manuscript/03.results.md

## Results

### Lineage information provides unique information about the source and dynamics of intratumoral heterogeneity

<!-- ASM proofed. -->

> To illustrate the unique value of lineage measurements in analyzing intra-tumoral and drug response heterogeneity, we hand-picked and plotted two sets of sample lineages from measurements of the breast cancer cell line AU565 in control condition with identical cell numbers over time (Fig. [@fig:lineage]a-b). Single-cell lineage perspective reveals a striking difference in cell cycle phase durations and cell division dynamics within the untreated cells in these two samples. Population-level measurements, on the other hand, provide an average of dynamical behaviors that mask cell to cell variations that evolve over time, hence, unable to identify the dynamical heterogeneity going on within the population. Measurements that record the history of cells (e.g., CFSE staining, Luria-Delbruck experiment) can help to identify these variations within cell populations but must make assumptions about the dynamics of heterogeneity [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.1715639115; @PMID:28607484]. Lineage measurements, by contrast, provide sufficiently rich temporal information to quantify the specific structure of the phenotypic heterogeneity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate the unique value of lineage measurements in analyzing intra-tumoral and drug response heterogeneity, we hand-picked and plotted two sets of sample lineages from measurements of the breast cancer cell line AU565 (Fig. [@fig:lineage]a-b). The single-cell lineage perspective reveals a striking difference in cell cycle phase durations and cell division dynamics between the two samples. Population-level measurements, on the other hand, would be unable to identify a difference as the starting and ending cell numbers are no different. Measurements that record the history of cells (e.g., CFSE staining, Luria-Delbruck experiment) can help to identify these variations within cell populations but must make assumptions about the dynamics of heterogeneity [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.1715639115; @PMID:28607484]. Lineage measurements, by contrast, provide sufficiently rich temporal information to quantify the specific structure of the phenotypic heterogeneity. 
```

> As a general overview of the data, we randomly sampled lineages from the gemcitabine treated cells (Fig. [@fig:lineage]c). Gemcitabine is a chemotherapy agent that disrupts DNA replication and results in extension of and apoptosis in S phase [@PMID:8431926]. The S/G2 phase lengths in treated cells are noticably extended compared to control cells, and cell division is diminished. Individual lineages include anywhere from zero to 3 cell divisions and show tightly shared dynamic behavior among cells and their close relatives. By observing individual cells, a variety of phenotypic measurements such as inter-mitotic times, cell cycle phase durations, motility, cell death and division, morphology, and protein and transcription factor levels can be characterized in parallel [@doi:10.1126/science.abc1944].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a general overview of the data, we randomly sampled lineages from the gemcitabine-treated cells (Fig. [@fig:lineage]c). Gemcitabine is a chemotherapy agent that disrupts DNA replication and results in extension of and apoptosis in S phase [@PMID:8431926]. The S/G2 phase lengths in treated cells are noticably extended compared to control cells, and cell division is diminished. Individual lineages show striking variation, including anywhere from zero to three cell divisions, but tightly shared behavior among cells and their close relatives. By observing individual cells, a variety of phenotypic measurements such as inter-mitotic times, cell cycle phase durations, motility, cell death and division, morphology, and protein and transcription factor levels might be characterized in parallel [@doi:10.1126/science.abc1944].
```

> ![**Population-based measurements are insufficient to distinguish the structure of heterogeneous populations.** Selected lineages of AU565 cells (a) heterogeneous untreated (b) homogeneous untreated lineages. (c) Randomly selected lineages of AU565 cells treated with 5 nM gemcitabine. Each line indicates the lifetime of one cell. The line branching into two lines indicates cell division. The G1 and S/G2 phase durations are shown in solid thick and thin lines, respectively.](figure1.svg){#fig:lineage}

Reviewer: What does "heterogeneous untreated" and "homogeneous untreated" mean?

Author: I meant figure 1a includes single lineages, as well as lineages with 4 divisions, but in figure 1b cells mostly divide at the same rate and include 2-3 generations.. I will replace the sentence with something better.

Author: I replaced it with:
"(a) untreated lineages with high growth dynamic variations and (b) untreated lineages with similar growth dynamics."
